And we're talking to Mrs. Goldsmith.
I think as an explanation to you, I would like to mention of your husband in this book that I'm writing.
And I want to have a chapter on the role played by the emigre booksellers.
Yes.
And, you know, everyone mentions how enormously influential your husband was.
Well, I must say he's been sort of
looked even now that he's dead four years ago, people still talk about him, because he really left a mark.
You see, we had a rather interesting kind of shop, which was very European in a way.
It was open to the public, and we had not only rare books, but we had, they were mainly European, but we had original prints and drawings
Some autographs, some musicals.
It was sort of varied.
And we often had many shows.
We had some of Jacques Villon and other people like that.
Eric at the Gloria Club faxed me some stories on this.
And so I saw John Russell's piece in the New York Times when the shop closed.
And he said, this is so sad.
This is such a great place because it's...
As you mentioned, it was a bookshop, it was a drawing room, and it was... Well, it was open, and we had people that came in, and we had like Philip Hofer, whom you probably know.
Of course.
He used to come in, and they all felt very much at home.
Barite was also one of our customers, and when we had something, we used to call them or write a letter.
Well, that doesn't exist anymore.
Now you have to press on the button in order to get in.
And everything has changed, and the customers have changed.
Now, tell me how important scholarship was to your husband, how important it was for him to study.
I've read a few pieces of how he spent so much time at the library and checking in.
Oh, yes, everything.
When he gave lectures, he gave the four-timer lecture and also the Malkin lecture at Columbia.
He made so much research, you have no idea.
Because when he came in front of his public, not a word was malpronounced, not a word was hesitation and all that, which is rather rare with booksellers.
They don't know how to express themselves.
Publicly, certainly.
No, no, I've noticed that.
They don't have this gift.
But Lucien had this sort of acting with him.
which was very enjoyable, because when we had people socially for meals, for supper, you know, we had some very interesting talks.
Now, he was born in Brussels.
Yes.
And he was educated in Berlin, is that right?
Yes, at the College Huguenot Francais in Berlin.
So he was bilingual, he was trilingual, because it was German and then French in Brussels.
And then English, he learned afterwards.
But I mean, he was very fluent.
Was it his intention from the beginning to be a bookseller?
No, he wanted to be a publisher.
And he started in Berlin with one of the big publishing firms.
No, auction firms.
Auctions.
But he wanted to become a publisher.
But he started in an auction.
And he said that was really an introduction to everything.
Because the amount of material that came in,
And some of these customers were so strange, and he often used to imitate them, because he enjoyed doing that kind of, well, you know, a little bit on it.
Not too much, but it was always very amusing.
Now, did he do any bookselling at all in Europe before he came to the United States?
No, he worked for Pierre Barret at the beginning.
And then Pierre Beres, that was in 1937, told him, well, he asked Pierre Beres, I feel like I have to leave Europe.
So he went the other way and arrived in San Francisco.
And it took something like, I think, many months.
And he arrived, I think, with something like maybe five or six books.
So finally he got to New York and he started.
And it was in connection with Pierre Beres, and he sent him the book.
And in 1953, he really decided to go on his own, because he was developing things that it went, and he wasn't always wanting to be the, shall we say,
Do you know Pierre Berets?
No, but I hope to interview him.
I just go back from London on Sunday.
Oh, I see.
He was interviewed last year by the young Le Monde.
Oh, really?
And I cut out that because it's by accident that during the summer, you see, I go to, we have a little summer house in the Ruerg.
And I always buy the paper there because I'm so keen as I'm bilingual.
You see, my father was professor at Oxford.
Romance languages, and we always spoke both languages.
At home?
At home, yes.
Really?
Oh, yes, I mean, I'm fluent in French.
Oh, wow.
I was going to make sure we're doing fine.
Huh?
I'm just checking out, sorry.
Is it okay?
Yeah, it's fine.
So, I think that's also how Lucien and I, I'm...
librarian by profession.
I studied in Geneva.
I got my diploma there.
Then I went back to England because I'm actually in English form.
And then during the war I worked at BBC in London.
I was in charge of the Bushhack Library.
How do you spell that?
Bush, B-U-S-H.
It was the library for anybody who wanted sort of foreign books, you know, to be
It was the, well, Bush House was at the top of Portland Street there, you know, and that's fiction.
But during the war, you see, after 1946, then I came to this country, but I'm not going to talk about myself.
That's why I'm interested, though, because I'm interested in how you met with him.
Well, I met him also during the war.
In Europe?
Yes, in London through a friend.
Actually, he was his...
schoolmate who had married a friend of mine from Bristol was a very good friend of mine and they were they had just got married and she told me why don't you come over for the day to London so I came over and I don't know what happened but they must have been just the right kind of attraction and for two years we corresponded because he asked me to send him a
if there was a French newspaper published during the war in England, and there was.
So that's how we started.
And you worked as a librarian here too?
No, I worked for Lucille because I married him in 46.
I see.
So he told me another thing, now you work for me.
So he made you part of the business.
Yeah, but I played check and fiddle all my life.
But I did all the descriptions and I did some of the research and what was necessary.
So you became a bibliographer as well then, didn't you?
Yeah.
What did Lucien study in university?
Well, he actually did not.
He never went to the university.
He didn't?
No.
What is amazing is that Basho in Berlin was equivalent to one the first year at the university.
I see.
But all his life, he had Latin and Greek at school.
It was a marvelous school.
I mean, what he learned.
And it opened up to everything because he was not only interested in art, literature, music, but also a bit of science.
He's a man who's like this.
And that is remarkable because you could talk to him about any subject.
Especially architecture.
He got very... And his son, I mean, I have a son and a daughter, and he is now... Well, he's been now for quite a few years.
He's now in New York.
He's in Tribeca.
And he has a firm called FTL, and they do lightweight structures.
And he's the one that did four projects for the Olympic Games, you know, in Atlanta.
And he did for the, every year, you know, there's that big tent that is put out in Central Park.
Well, that is my son that created it.
And he's done many other things.
But you see, with the two, they got along very well, the son and the father, because the son opened up his views on spaces, and we took our children to Europe.
We didn't put them in camps.
We took them to Greece, we took them to Portugal, we took them to Italy.
You see, I think that's the best education that we've given them.
And they have both, my daughter who's a jeweler, this is what she does, and they both said this was the best education.
I've never heard them say, well, of course, they criticize their parents naturally, they're old-fashioned and so on, but it has been a wonderful kind of feeling, and Lucien, I think, benefited very much from this.
What's the son?
What are the children's names?
Nicholas, thank you.
C-H-O-L-A-S.
And the other one is Juliet.
J-U-L-I-E-T.
But my son is Goldsmith.
He's not Goldsmith.
So he is Nicholas Gold... Smith.
Smith.
Yes.
So when your husband first went to work for Beres, what kind of things did he do?
Well, I mean, Beres had this shop
in Paris, and he had French literature, mainly what you call les belles, and then he went to dealers and enter private people, who was very good at getting sort of not only manuscript, but autographed letters, or libraries from people who had been sort of, I mean,
writers, anybody like that.
So Lucier had benefits in a way, but he was very difficult to have.
He was very self-centered.
They were the same age.
Really?
He's still alive.
Yes.
And he, if you read that article by, I could give you a copy of Rutherford Black.
I would love that.
That would be wonderful.
I was going to be asking you if that would be okay.
No, no.
I'll do that.
You can see that man is so vain.
Because you see, when the person I was interviewing him said, well, tell me a little bit about your biography.
And he sort of said, oh, my biography is too rich.
I have no memory.
He has no less, I've known him for 50 years now.
He has no less
His first wife is Huguette Beret, who has a gallery at the Quai Voltaire.
And she has a gallery of art, and a very wonderful gallery.
And her daughter is with her, so it's Huguette Anne Isabelle Beret.
This is her daughter with Beret?
With Ger, yeah.
He had three children with the first one.
And one is a doctor, a medical doctor, who belonged to the, wait a minute, called them, Les Médecins Sans Frontières.
And he went to all sorts of places.
He also, like his father, can't stick to the same one.
So Pierre Beres-Arthoud married eye specialist.
for two years.
And then after that, he married a charming girl.
We liked her so much.
And they had five children.
And he divorced her to get married to a younger girl.
And I understand he has a little baby of, say, two years.
I'm disgusted.
He's an elderly man.
He's got a little baby.
Yeah.
He's my age.
When I'm 84, he's 83.
And he has a child?
Well, look, Charlie Chaplin, Picasso, they've gone on having children all their lives.
But it's not fair for the kids, either.
I agree with you, because there is something... It's not right when there is such a difference of age between... Because a father at that age can't be a real father.
No, besides, he never looked after his children.
So he had eight children...
and this one makes nine, and the ones in between.
Don't ask me.
Well, they must be quite... So, was he helpful to Lucien, though, in some ways?
Well, for Lucien, because, you see, after all, he started with nothing.
So he did help him at the beginning.
But then he was always sending us books that we found very difficult to sell, because Pierre Vérez did not want to
uh bother with these well you know when you buy a whole library there's some books you don't quite know what to do so he thought well let's send them to new york he can do what he likes so after a little while you can and the letters the two of them wrote together i mean i can tell you i have still some letters there oh it was very difficult no you're not an easy man well was the name of the company here uh
Pierre Beret.
Oh, so it was under Beret's name here then.
Yeah, Pierre Beret's at the beginning.
And after 1953, it was called Lucien Goldschmidt Think.
And so did he sever his ties with Beret at that point?
Yes, well, yes, but we, I mean, we didn't quarrel, I mean.
No, but I mean, basically it was time to begin.
Yeah, I mean, he said that that was enough and he divided whatever there was.
Tell me, now Lucien left
Well, at the counter of the Nazis.
And then he was in the army.
You see, he volunteered to be in the American army.
And he went.
He had an extremely interesting time because he was in the intelligence.
And that is where he met some interesting people who were professors or assistants
He met I don't know how many people that were all Americans and also with plenty of knowledge.
And we've been friends with several.
Did he ever talk at all about his experiences with Europe?
I mean, was he fearful that he would be... Did he have a sense that he would probably be killed by the Nazis if he stayed there?
No, but he didn't like the way it was going.
And he saw quite well that things would have gone and he probably would have also disappeared.
I mean, he had his eyes wide open.
And have you read Barney Rosenthal's lecture on the Jewish emigre booksellers?
Are you familiar with the lecture?
Yes, the one who gave it, not the Morgan, they gave it at Columbia.
No, the Morgan.
Yes, absolutely.
The Malkin Lecture, yeah.
The thrust of that essay, of that lecture, and it's just something I'm trying to develop in this book, is he contends that, and Roger started at Harvard is the one who pointed this out to me, that this small group of booksellers really did change the flow in the history of bookselling for a period of 40 or 50 years.
Would you agree with that?
Absolutely.
Because they had knowledge.
And they were willing to work very hard.
There was Offenbaché, Offenbach, who made beautiful catalogues.
They were willing to work at it.
And finally, they had such knowledge.
You see?
I mean, compared to the booksellers here, they have one little section, but they have nothing further.
We had books right from the Renaissance,
Oh, I mean, right to time of Picasso.
And it's amazing.
And also some German books and some Italian and Spanish and all that.
So this is really maybe less on... We have nothing on American, nothing in English.
Really?
No, because you have to specialize.
And as we started with Pierre Beres, naturally we became specializing on this.
But all the illustrated books by Matisse, Dulcey, Picasso, we had all these books.
What they call Les... What was it?
Les D'artistes.
Les D'artistes, yeah.
Yeah, I know.
By the way, I've got a few of these.
This is the one we made, which is really quite good, on Villon.
If you want to have this, I'll give it to you yourself.
This is another one, which is... And this is the one we're very proud of.
Oh, this is wonderful.
Are you going to let me borrow these?
No, no, you can have them.
I'll give them to you.
Oh, you're wonderful.
This is the one that Lisien was very proud of.
It took 12 years to accumulate these books.
You see, he had a sense of being good.
A good citizen was really in him.
What is strange...
He has so many traits, like my father had.
It's very strange.
And this, it took him 12 years to accumulate.
And he did all the notes here.
So you can see how thorough this is.
Now tell me, explain to me from my tape recorder what a good citizen is.
Well, books that would actually improve the mankind.
And furthermore, the introduction is by Nicholas Parker, whom you'll probably know, who's a brilliant speaker.
Oh, he's a marvelous man, and he's got knowledge.
He also wrote a very nice, when my husband died, in one of the English newspapers.
I'll have to check it out.
I may have that.
I can also send you it.
Let me do my card, too, before we...
Okay.
I think you gave me on the telephone your... I did.
But still.
I'll give you a card anyway.
So was he pleased to be an American?
Oh, he enjoyed it.
He has never regretted it.
And he hasn't felt, well, maybe the fact that I'm not Jewish.
I mean, I'm the only one in the family who's not Jewish.
And would you believe it?
I hold the family together, because we have some relatives in Israel, and when they come, they feel more termed with me, though, I mean, we don't talk so much about religion, but I don't know what it is.
It's maybe also my Swiss background.
I have some Swiss blood, you see.
So, I mean, that was before the gold business.
So what was your maiden name?
How do you spell?
S-T-U-D-E-R.
Okay.
So anyway, you were talking about the good citizens.
Yeah.
This is amazing.
And he was very disappointed because this did not sell properly.
Only a little bit.
And he was hoping that one library or one collector would like to buy the whole thing.
So that disappointed him.
So what happened to the collection?
It was sold... Well, in this, but I mean, we had things left over.
So this is a collection he put together himself.
Yeah.
Did he consider himself a collector?
Oh, he also, because look, he collected, and look at what we have on the walls.
I mean, look.
But when he was putting this together, do you think he was collecting for himself, in a way?
No.
I think he wanted to do it.
Well, because unless you're very rich, you can't really keep all these things.
You have to buy.
But you see, to be quite frank, when you buy a collection, there's always one or two things that you can feel, oh, well, I can keep that for myself.
I mean, without being, if I should say that.
Oh, that's funny.
So when was this?
When did this happen?
I'll check it out.
Doesn't it say their date?
It does, yes.
It should.
Yeah.
Well, we closed the shop... 1981, it is.
This is the last catalogue we produced, and that was exactly ten years ago, when we closed the shop.
So, was he sad to close the shop, or was...?
No, he was 75, and I was 74, and he decided, told everybody, I don't want to go come out on a stretcher.
And I think he was right.
So he had five years of being retired,
And he went on seeing dealers and go on writing a bit of this and that and giving lectures.
He gave quite a few lectures, you know.
And he was also, this is what he got these letters, the Toulouse-Rotrack letters that Mr. Chemault.
Mr. Chemault bought from us.
But that is quite a feat.
because my husband found letters that had been hidden in a little kind of sort of reticule, you call it in French, kind of little bag.
And some of them, the people didn't know.
It's actually the only thing that you would have on the life of Toulouse-Rautrec, because he never wrote anything.
And these are the letters
written to his mother, and to all sorts of people.
Well, and where did your husband find these?
Ah, he was very clever there.
You see, every time he went to Europe for about three weeks, and he used to make the round, he is very acquainted with André Jamme.
How do you feel?
Jamme, J-A-M-M-E-S.
Okay.
He's from Paris, and it's a
third generation, I think, of booksellers, or at least a second.
And they were very, very friendly.
And he was wonderful, that man.
He still exists.
He's much younger than we are.
So where are these letters now?
Oh, they were sold to Schimmel, Mr. Schimmel.
Oh, I see.
Who I don't know what happened, whether he still has them or whether
It was because he sold his whole collection to a Japanese sort of, I don't know what you would call him, a collector of some kind.
I don't know.
You think they went to Japan, possibly?
Yeah, I think so.
But were these letters located by your husband?
Yes, he found them all.
And then... Little by little, and there were some also that came at auction.
So, of course,
called up Herb Schimmel because they were very friendly.
They saw each other at least every week, every two weeks, you know, and so on.
And where is Schimmel located?
Well, he is.
I can give you... He's an American collector, sure.
Oh, yes.
He's a well-known man.
But now his collection, I think, has changed a bit because I think he had also furniture of the... Well, if you tell me how to get in touch with him, I'll ask him what happened to the... Yeah.
Yeah.
Since 1955, together with Lucien Goldsmith, he has undertaken the enormous task of tracing and collecting surviving Toulouse-La Tricorda.
In fact, it was your husband that traced these, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I'd love to talk to him.
He could probably give me some pretty interesting information about that.
Oh, yes, he would.
Yeah.
I think he's in town.
He has also a place in Florida.
He does?
West, what do you call it?
Okay.
West Palm Beach or wherever?
No, no, not where.
Lower down, where they...
It's rather the old... What is it called?
I don't have that, but I have the... If you want, I can give you his address.
Yes, I'd happily write him.
We'll call him.
We have an office, 150 Central Park South.
Or maybe that 75 is the office.
The other one would be 223...
7366.
223.
That would be the home of the office.
The home.
And I think the office would be 7656114.
Well, I'll try the office.
Yeah, and it's 32406.
He has a son, so maybe the son can tell you.
Okay.
I love to, when I'm writing about books, I always talk to some of the people who work with them, you know.
Yeah.
They can give a nice comment.
No, no, he would because, I mean, we did so much for him and also we saw them.
But you know, it's very funny.
All these people since I'm a widow, completely out.
I mean, I would never have thought.
That's why I do more for women who are getting widows.
I mean, I have several of my friends.
But I've never seen anything like that.
And the Grohny Club is the only place where immediately I used to be very friendly with Martin Antonetti.
Do you know him?
Yes.
He's actually charming.
Yes, he just went to Smith College.
Yes, I know, but he was a very good friend of mine.
And he told me right from the beginning, there won't be any difference.
I will send you all the announcements.
Isn't that nice?
And then after three years, I decided, everybody said, why don't you become a member?
Because I work there one afternoon a week.
I said, they've been so good, I'm going to do something for this club.
And they rather like it because they don't have anybody who's professional to file the cards and all that.
It's a good filing for them.
I've done a lot of filing and things like that.
That's great, because you're a professional.
They don't have to explain to me.
They say, can you get me this?
I'm in this catalog or so on, and I usually find it.
Oh, that's great.
I was just delighted to grow your last year myself.
Well, I was also last year, but... Yeah, I went to the... Did you go to the dinner this year?
Yes.
Yes, I was there.
Yeah.
It was very nice.
No, no, it's very nice.
And they were extremely decent to me, so I said, well, now that I come in through the main door, it makes a little difference.
But they've been very, very good, and it's the only institution.
Lucien was a life member at the Metropolitan.
We also, MoMA and all these places.
No, no.
Hard to figure out, isn't it?
I think I understood because a lawyer who used to come to our shop told me, well, it's very simple.
You were two people.
You were a couple.
And now you're only one.
And then somebody else told me, you know, that women are so afraid when there is a single woman that she's going to take the husband away.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, that's a very narrow way, but I know that things have happened this way.
But you see, if I was a widow, widower, this wouldn't have happened, because they've always want more men at dinner table.
So in order to combat this, I invite people, because I'm very fond of cooking, and this is where I have my little revenge, and from time to time I have about eight people for supper, and I cook.
a lot of decent people.
Now this is the way I can get some of these people back because nobody in New York has very good time.
They're always so busy or they invite you for these kind of cocktails where you eat this impossible food and the next day you're sick because half of it stayed too long in the icebox.
Or it was catered by somebody, you know.
Did your husband go to Europe after the war?
Did he acquire material?
He went every year.
To bring staff, yeah.
Of course, he knew where to go, right?
He knew where to go, and also he made friends all the time, because the people noticed he knew so much.
And he had a way of going through and talk at the same time.
It was rather interesting to notice.
He was talking, and yet he could see there was an interesting book of it.
Alors, dites-moi, vous n'avez rien d'autre?
Ou vous avez sûrement quelque chose?
You know, I can remember all this.
It was really, very nice.
Did he do much work with institutions, or was it mostly private?
No, no, quite a bit, and he went to institutions.
And what, like, you mentioned Philip Holford.
Did he get stuff for Harvard?
Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes.
And for Yale, I mean... Yes, I mean, before we had, because he made so many catalogues, he did something like 63 catalogues, I think.
So do you think that the collections in this country are so much stronger because of people like your husband and some of the others who went in and... I think it made the base of several.
Because you see also he was able
to sort of describe why they should have it.
Because he had the knowledge.
Most booksellers here, the knowledge is rather slim.
I don't care if they've been at the university, but it's what you do afterwards with what you have.
Explain what you mean to me.
Can you give me an example?
When you say the knowledge,
Because if you see a book, it's just a book.
It takes somebody to understand the context of the book, the importance.
Yeah, and also the, for instance, the binding.
Who bound the thing?
When it was done?
Was it influenced by this or that?
And where did it come from?
From which library before?
I mean, all of that is very subtle.
But you have to be...
very interested in it.
And then he would make these representations to the institutions?
Yeah, he would call them up, or then sometimes he was invited to go over.
For instance, Rosenwald, you know?
Lessing.
Lessing, yeah.
He went regularly.
And he knew how to behave with people, because he had a great deal of diplomatic
Behaviour, shall we say.
And also you went to Dumbarton Oaks, Mrs. Bliss.
You know, the Mrs. What is the first name?
Wood?
No.
Mrs. Bliss, yeah.
That's in Washington.
That's in Washington, the Dumbarton Oaks.
She was tempted with something.
And then she said, Mr. Goldschmidt.
You see, let me take these people afterwards.
Why don't you sell something else?
So he knew exactly what it was.
And there was also Mrs. Hunt, you know, the one who, she had four children, Marietje.
The one with all the flowers, you know, she did this bibliography of flowers.
You know whom I mean?
That's Paul Miller's one.
No, no, no, I know.
No, no, it isn't.
Oh, my gosh.
What is it, Carnegie?
Carnegie or something.
I forget many things.
But she actually, at one time, we had the roses of Roduté.
But the original, original watercolor that Roduté did with, now, which is, is it?
or the scene, or I don't know which one.
You see, I don't want to give you notes, you have to check this.
I always check everything out.
Don't worry about that.
No, because I wouldn't like to be told afterwards.
I never go just by quotes.
Yeah, okay.
That's why I take notes too, for things to check out.
No, she actually...
You see, Rodite gave a watercolor lesson to some of these aristocratic people.
And he is the most famous man on roses.
And there was an album of his original, we got that through Berest.
And they were extremely expensive.
And he did the roses and he did also the lilies.
And the lilies were, a couple of years ago, sold at
Sotheby.
And I think they had been in the collection of this bookseller who was really, oh my gosh, his daughter is still alive.
Oh, what's the name now?
Well, that's okay.
Well, anyway, there was a two.
But these roses, Lucien sold one white rose and one red rose in pairs.
And then Mrs. Hunt bought two, and I think also Mrs. Bliss and other people.
But these were very tops.
How did he get so interested in the art and the engravings?
Well, that came with, I don't know, I suppose with the... Also, you see, having old books.
Because in it you have these illustrations.
So you have to learn more.
But he was amazing.
He has a really very good eye.
I mean, to see what it was or whether what century and so on and what it represented and so on.
And we had a huge library of reference that I sold.
Soon after he died, because he had to.
He was in storage.
We couldn't go on doing that.
Somebody else was used to do another bookseller you for?
Well, I mean, no, no.
We sold it at Swan.
Oh, really?
So it was anybody who wanted.
But it sold quite well.
Better than the books.
Now I'm making a list of all the prints that are left over.
Oh, my God.
You get into prints really as an adjunct to the books?
Yeah, because he's disinterested in him.
The art always is.
Look at the furniture he bought.
I mean, we have a huge table there, which is a nose one.
I've got a cover on top, but that's a Spanish table.
This one is from Austria, and we have some old furniture also in the hoard.
renaissance and then he was interested in keys you see that's his keys but those two are mine that's my interest also no not the keys but i mean these kind of strange uh ornaments yeah yeah this uh this one comes from
I have a few things like that, but I don't have to be like my husband, you see.
I don't have to do something different.
This reminded me so much of textile, because my daughter was in textile, and I've always been interested in textile.
I've done knitting and sew and winnit and what.
And this comes from, I think, Rihanna.
But it has a wonderful touch, and this is what I like.
Did your husband write at all about his experiences at the bookstore?
No, he didn't want to.
Because he said there would be too much... Several people approached and said, why don't you write a book?
He said, no, I don't want to give all these bits of stories because I know what people want.
They want something that is exciting, you know?
Little stories.
They don't want...
something which is really... They don't want knowledge, they want anecdotes.
Exactly.
They want to be entertained.
And you didn't want to write that.
That's why I think that I don't know anybody who said any nasty word about him.
Which is quite remarkable.
So he was a totally discreet man, in other words.
Very discreet.
And he didn't like committees because he said, it's a waste of time.
Everybody wants to say his little thing.
You can do all that in five minutes.
He was very quick.
Did he take any particular pride and pleasure in helping people build wonderful collections?
Yes, he did.
He liked that.
And if he could help anybody, for instance, somebody who was a student who said, well, you see,
I would love this, but I really can't afford it.
They would say, well, you don't have to tell me now.
Put it aside and you can give me, say, five or ten dollars next month and so on.
And several people have really come back and said, you know, you started me on it.
Really?
And for instance, the dealer Goodfriend, Jim Goodfriend, when he wanted to go into dealing, he came to Lucerne and asked him,
What do you think about it?
And he encouraged him.
He said, yes, yes, you should.
He never had any close calls, as you said, he mentioned in France, when the Nazis were coming, and did he mention it at all?
No, I don't think so, because it was a little bit before.
Yeah, he left in what?
37.
Yeah.
So it was 39, that's where it was.
Very, very bad.
And the funny part of it,
Where he was working, the man in charge told him, I think if I can give you any advice, it's getting very sort of sticky.
If I were you, I would not come back on Monday.
So he gave him a help there, and he didn't.
He didn't come back to work to work?
To work.
He told him, it's better if you sort of just go now.
Before it really gets sticky.
And so did he mean just that Monday or like for good?
No, for good.
No, no, for good.
So they were telling him something.
Oh yes, they were.
And he knew it from other people.
He knew it.
That was the time.
The Nazis hadn't already taken over Paris at that point, had they?
Oh, no, no, no.
That was later.
No, no.
That was before the war.
The war only started in September 1939.
That's right.
No, no.
But you see, if you had your ears open and if you were understanding certain things,
I went twice to Germany because I had to work in the library.
That was also 35, 36.
And I got very friendly with one S.R.
Nazi.
And we used to sort of discuss things.
I mean, I was in Switzerland, so as I'm not Jewish, nothing was happening to me.
But it was very interesting to see from one year to another what was happening and the views.
And the funny part of it, I was playing with a Frau Director, because I was working at the Tübingen Library as what they call a practicanting, you know, practical work.
And then this woman would not have taken me if I hadn't been the daughter of a professor.
Papa, what snob she was.
So she used to tell me when I came home for lunch, and so on.
And then she asked me once if I would be kind enough to, there was a student who would come for lunch because that was part of what Hitler was doing to try these poor students
to have an extra lunch in a rather well-to-do family.
So I said, sure, because she said, I won't be there.
So what happened?
I mean, we started talking.
We got along so well talking that she told me, but this is not what I asked you.
You just gave him the food.
You're not supposed to talk to him.
So I really was upset because this was not at all my attitude.
But I've seen quite a number of things happening before, and that was in 36, I think, 35, 36.
Now the books, were these his own collection here?
No, no, here he bought them.
He came only with five books.
All this is things here.
By the way, there is this, you know that he did this for the Grody Club?
No.
Oh, The Truthful... The Truthful Lens.
That is really a masterpiece.
That was the premise for the Grody Club, huh?
Yeah.
It's out of print now.
And the show was terrific.
It was done with...
with Neff from the Metropolitan Museum before he went to Getty.
It's all books which are... I can actually give you this because I have an extra one.
You're sure?
Yeah, I have an extra one.
That would be great.
That'll explain it.
I don't have to write it down here.
Yeah, okay.
Actually, it was books with original photographs.
And it covers, I mean, all subjects, you know.
I mean, science, anatomy, everything.
Now, this was his idea to do that?
I don't know if it was, but he is the one who invented the title, The Truthful Letter.
And what did it mean to him?
Oh, he was very happy.
But what did the title mean?
How did he invent it?
Well, because he got interested in photographs, original photographs.
You see this fellow who, oh, what's his name?
It starts with a W. The one that died a few years ago.
Had a huge collection.
Photographs?
Yeah, and his boyfriend was Mapo, what was it?
Maple Farm.
Maple Farm?
West End?
No.
West End.
Maple Forbes was the photographer?
The photographer, yeah.
But this man was the one who had the money.
And then he did ceramics, he bought ceramics and all that.
But what I mean is that Lucien, he was also his customer, and Lucien was interested in him.
So this gentleman was a collector too, is that right?
Western Neff?
Western Neff, no.
He was a curator.
of photography at the Metropolitan Museum.
I see.
Is he still alive?
No, of course.
He's at the Getty.
He's in charge of the whole collection of photographs at the Getty.
Neff is?
Neff.
I'll give him a call.
He's a very easy-going.
He talks like this and very easy-going.
He belongs to the Groni Club.
Good.
I'll give him a call.
I know some people at the Getty.
Yeah.
I like to get
things from lots of people.
Well, sure, that's the only way to do it.
It's like a... But that is a beautiful, very well done.
So he was really interested in expanding his knowledge, wasn't he?
No, never.
It was always... And as I say, I mean, except that he was a little bit annoyed when it became with computers.
We hadn't got into that.
Probably he would have later on.
There's a clip in there.
He probably won't.
Oh, that is probably... Well, here's his name right here.
Here's the fellow you're looking for.
Yeah, Wagstaff.
There we are.
You're right.
Wagstaff.
Yeah.
I'm just going to write down the date when this is in.
Maybe you can even Xerox this for me.
Sam.
This was folded into that.
Yeah, probably.
Well, that's Hilton Kramer that wrote this.
The days when picture books had real pictures, yeah.
Of course, it all gets very... Now, Lucien, I mean, you can see what a collector is.
He gets all these little bits, and since he died, you have no idea, the little bits of paper here and there.
It's dreadful.
And that's his notes, you see?
Uh-huh.
See, we just found something, didn't we?
Yeah, we did.
Well, I mean...
That you can take with your own.
Original photographs, 1844 to 1914.
So that was quite a remarkable one.
I know, I know.
And then you had to, you see, André Jam helped him a lot, because André Jam had a huge collection of photographs, of original photographs.
He had André
And he sold his collection also to the Getty.
So the Getty has about three or four enormous collections, which they each bought for over $5 million.
Now, did Lucien sell any photographs to the Getty into these... He must have, yeah, he must have, but I don't know... What was the other clip that we just found?
Let me just write down what it was that was in there, just so I can find this in there, just so I can locate this.
Oh, this must be a review of the show, right?
Yeah, it is.
It probably is, yeah.
I'd forgotten it was in there.
Sunday, December 29th, 1974, New York Times, page 22.
I'll just get this out on a microphone.
Okay.
This must have been very interesting to your husband why he would put this away.
Well, no, every time there was something out, he would keep it.
Because this is really how a bibliophile collector... If you look at all the people in France, for instance, that have collected, I mean, for quite a long time, they have notes in their books about an auction where a similar book came out, or I don't know what.
So that is really the... So he must have clipped it for this article, not this one.
Yeah, but he didn't want to cut it up.
That's what he did.
I'm just trying to see what he did here.
Very good.
Oh, they're talking about their show.
Okay, good.
Excellent.
So he must have done a lot of research.
Oh, yes.
He worked all the time.
Were there any collections in particular that he took special pride in having helped build that you can think of?
No.
My memory isn't so good in that respect.
I mean, there must be several.
Once he got a whole, it was a piece of luggage from an old woman and
She came, I don't know how he got to know, but as the shop was open, it was easy to come in and, you know, we were well known at the New York Public Library or the Met, the Met was so close to us.
It was at 83rd and Madison, our shop.
1117.
And then this case was absolutely full of prints that her husband must have collected.
So there was
for years and years a source, because I think we paid her for a big sum for the whole thing.
But there was always more and more in that relief, so that was interesting.
You don't mind my asking, jumping around with the questions, but when you went on these shopping trips, so to speak, to Europe, did you have an idea of collections that would be available because of the war, that prices might be good?
people might be more willing, let's say, to sell things?
To sell?
No, I don't think so.
I don't think he had... But there was quite a movement of... Oh, yes, there was a tremendous amount of books, because when he first came back from the war, I remember that the booksellers here, all the foreign ones, were all sort of queuing up because he wanted to see what he'd brought in, and he had some lovely stuff.
You don't know where he went.
Did he go to private homes?
Oh, a bit of everything, yeah.
And then somebody told him about this one when he started talking.
And then, you know, you get to know this.
And you said Harvard, Yale.
Can you think of any other institutions he might have helped?
Oh, well, there's also Texas there.
What is that fellow?
Oh, Texas.
Oh, yes.
Harry Ransom and Tom Staley down in Texas.
Yeah, but before that, isn't there a fellow?
Wallen Roberts.
Yeah.
And also California.
Oh, well, nice.
Oh.
And also Chicago.
There's Jim Wells.
He was a very good friend of Jim Wells.
He's still alive.
Jim Wells.
Now, he was at the University of Chicago?
The Newbury Library.
Oh, the Newbury Library.
Yeah.
Oh, yes.
And also the fellow that took over.
What's his name?
It starts with a T, I think.
Yeah.
So I'll check the Newbury too.
So that's... And all the museum.
There's...
For instance, there was Joachim, who was in charge, the director of the museum.
Which museum?
In Chicago.
Oh, I see.
What's it called?
The Field Museum?
No, no, not Field.
Oh, the Art Institute.
The Art Institute of Chicago.
Yeah, I think so.
And now there's a fellow, I also know him.
Is he called Dvorak or somebody like that?
Oh, sure.
Oh, and there was Mrs. Lambert was a very, the architect who did that beautiful, not a museum, but, well, it is a museum, in Montreal.
You know, she created that architectural museum.
Oh, sure, yeah.
Phyllis Lambert.
Oh, okay, yeah.
Oh, she used to come every time and we got her wonderful collections.
Lucien once also got the whole leftover from an architect that had done the, in Paris, one of the theaters, I think.
But there was a huge amount of these drawings.
And he was called Rouault de Fleury, I think his name was.
And did he buy basically for stock, or did he buy it for collect, for... Well, he bought it for stock because he made this catalog.
By what he got, he could figure out what we can make with what we have.
We can make, say, a catalog on, I don't know, 18th century this, or so on.
So what do you like to do with certain themes for each other?
Well, you have to see what you get.
You can't do it in advance.
Except when it's come with this one, where every time he found a book that might mean something, then he would put it aside.
So he would basically do themes, though, in his catalogs?
Yeah, sections, yeah, because it was never the same.
He would never just do a catalog with various miscellaneous items?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
We had to do something that was... You see, there was also the...
shall we say, not the aesthetic side, which was very, very polished, shall we say.
So every catalogue was like a production, really.
Yes.
It was a performance.
Yeah, it was a performance.
Yeah.
And that is the thing that... I think we can use that.
Is that a fair statement?
Yeah.
No, no, I would say that it was a performance.
I like that, don't you think so?
Yeah, I think so.
Almost like a production, like a play, like a book.
Yes, like a play.
Well, exactly.
I mean, he did make a film because now it's all with films now.
Videos and films.
No.
See, that was almost a very humanistic point of view that he took towards his bookselling.
Yeah.
He put things together.
He would study them and then explain them in their context.
Did anyone ever buy on block, buy entire catalogs?
No, no, nobody did.
As I say, he would have liked to have had this one, and he thought one person would, but apparently it didn't work.
Now, you told me that there was another fellow, Dickinson, who was contacting you on this?
Was he asking basically the same things?
Well, he had...
actually a piece that he had written, because he did this by letter.
Oh, I see.
And he wanted me to correct it.
And I corrected it, and I added things.
Then he sent it back to me, because he said he had... the whole book is on different book setters.
I see.
That have come from Europe, and have sort of...
I would say made the market, but created a market.
Before them, there wasn't a market.
Well, a market for what?
For books, for, I mean, for, not anti... Specifically.
Yes, well, it's more antiquarian, antiquariat.
That is what it is.
The antiquariat is really what these people wrote.
And so his, you would say, the market that Lucien created would have been this lead artist, the artist?
Also, yes, but also old books.
I mean, even we had Bibles, ancient Bibles, and we had one or two manuscripts.
We even had a collection of music items.
Now, who was this man?
Oh, la la.
We had the whole of his collection.
We had to start making a catalogue.
I don't have that catalogue anymore.
That's okay.
Well, I mean, there is so much.
I think we've got a lot of stuff here.
I don't want to conflict with Dickinson in any way.
I mean, I'll try to do... No, no.
He is really a real librarian.
Uh-huh.
And he... He's called Dickinson, I think.
John Dickinson.
He's in Arizona.
I know who he is.
Yes, Arizona, Tucson.
Right.
Yes.
But he wanted to do... I think that book is coming out.
I see.
Good.
And he wanted one chapter, let's say about two or three pages, on each of these book sets.
I see.
And he had some amount.
But it's also through Barney Rosenthal that he got my name, and that's how it started.
So Barney insisted that I, really suggested that I see you and also... But you know, I'm a bit annoyed with Barney.
He comes to the glory cloud, he even sees me, and he hardly says hello to me.
It's, oh, this is what I can't understand.
What's the matter with them?
I knew his brother very well at Oxford, you know.
I'll be, I think.
A wonderful fellow.
I was in England last week, and I was hoping to see him.
I didn't have time.
Isn't he retired now?
It's his daughter that came over.
That's right.
His daughter was with Barney.
In fact, they were together.
Oh, really?